دون <b>II</b> to record, write down, set down, put down in writing (هـ s.th.); to enter, list, register, book (هـ s.th.); to collect (هـ poems) │دون شرطا (šarṭan) to stipulate a condition <b>V</b> to be recorded, be written down, be put down in writing


دون dūn low, lowly; bad, poor, inferior; meager, inadequate │ عامله بالدون (‘āmalahū) he snubbed him


دون dūna (prep.) below, beneath, under (in rank, value, etc.); this side of, short of; before; without more than; with the exclusion of, leaving ... aside, disregarding ...; and not by any means, but not │ دون ذلك (with foll. nominative) on the way to that, there is ... , before accomplishing that one must …, دون ذلك خرط القتاد (karṭ al-qatad) before one can do that, one must strip the tragacanth of its leaves, i.e., accomplish the impossible; بدون, من دون (dūni) without; with the exclusion of, excluding; بدون ان and من دون ان without (+ foll. gerund in Engl.); دونك dūnaka (with foll. acc.) here you are! take ...! watch out (هـ for)! beware (هـ of)! هو دون he is below him, he doesn’t measure up to him; كان دونه أهمية (ahammīyatan) to be of less importance than ...; اثم دونه كل اثم itmun dūnahū kullu itmin a sin to end all sins; الذين هم دون السن العسكرية (sinn, ‘askarīya) those below the age for military service; دون ما نظر الى (naẓarin) regardless of, irrespective of; دون ما فائدة with no benefit at all; completely useless; تخشى ان يسعدن دونها (takšā an yas‘adna) she is afraid they will be happier than she is; تلك الكتب دون غيرها (kutub, gairihā) those books and no others; ان متعجب من فضلك دون علمك (muta‘ajjib, faḍlika, ‘ilmika) I admire your virtue, but not your knowledge, or, I admire your virtue more than your knowledge; كم الأفواه دون دون التذمر والشكوى (kamma, tadammur, šakwā) he stopped their mouths to keep them from muttering and complaining; اذا كان الغصن دون ما يحتمله (guṣnu, yaḥtamiluhū) if the branch is not strong enough to carry him; وصل دونهم الى الغايةit was he, not they, who reached the goal; اشاحت بوجهها دونه (ašāḥat· bi-wajhihā) she averted her face so that he could not see her; حال دون الشيء to prevent s.th.; الأشعة دون الحمراء (aši‘‘a, ḥamrā‘) the infrared rays; الموجات دون القصيرة (maujāt) ultra-short waves (radio)