كل kalla i (kall, كلة killa, كلال kalāl, ; كلالة kalāla, كلول kulūl, كلولة kulūla) to be or become tired, fatigued, weary, exhausted, weak; to be dim, dull, languid, expreosionless, (glance, eyes); to become blunt (sword) │ لا يكل indefatigable, untiring <b>II</b> to crown (ه s.o., also fig. هـ s.th.); (Chr.) to perform the marriage ceremony (priest); to become dull, obtuse, expressionless (face); to become blunt (sword) │ كلل بالنجاح kullila bi-l-najāḥ to be crowned by success <b>IV</b> to make languid or tired, to weary, tire, fatigue, exhaust, wear out, harass, torment (ه s.o.); to dim (هـ the glance) <b>V</b> to be crowned; to wear a crown; (Chr.) to be married


كل kall weariness, tiredness, fatigue, exhaustion; dimness, dullness; dull, dim, feeble (glance, mind)


كل kull totality, entirety; everyone, each one, anyone; (with foil. def. noun) whole, entire, all; (with fall. indef. noun) every; الكل the whole. all, everything │ بالكل on the whole, in the aggregate, taken altogether, in bulk; الكل بالكل everything, all-embracing, all-comprehensive, all-powerful; كل من فلان وفلان وفلان (kullun min) A as well as B as well as C; على كل ‘alā kullin in any case, at any rate; كله kulluhū he entirely, all of him, it entirely, all of it; كل ذلك kullu dālika all that; كل البيت kullu l-baiti or البيت كله al-b. kulluhū the whole house; كل الرجال or الرجال كلهم all men; الحقيقة كل الحقيقة (kullu l-ḥ.) the whole truth, nothing but the truth; السر كل السر (sirr) a very great secret; الخير كل الخير (kair) true or complete happiness; كل رجل kullu rajulin every man; كل شيء k. šai’in every thing, everything, all; كل احد k. aḥadin and كل واحد k. wāḥidin every (single) one, each one; كل من kullu man everyone who, whoever, whosoever; كل ما kullu mā all that …, whatever, whatsoever; كل ما في الأمر ان k. mā fī l-amri anna there is no more to it than ..., it’s nothing but ...; كل وقت kulla waqtin at any time, always; في كل سبعة ايام fī kulli sab‘ati ayyāmin in each seven days, every seven days; لكل الف li-kulli alfin per (one) thousand