محل maḥall pl. -āt, محال maḥāll2 place, location, spot, site, locale, locality, center; (place of) residence; business; business house, firm, commercial house; store, shop; object, cause (e.g., of dispute, admiration, etc.); gear (automobile) │حل محله and احله محله see حل I and IV; محله (maḥallahū) in his (its) place; في محله in his (its) place, in his (its) stead, instead of him; كان في محله to be in the right place; to be appropriate, expedient, advisable; to be justified, warranted; في غير محله improper, misplaced, unsuitable, ill-suited; out of place; inappropriate, inexpedient, inopportune; صادف محله ṣādafa maḥallahū to be convenient, be most opportune; لا محل له (maḥalla) there is no room for ... ; it is out of place, quite déplacé; محل العمل m. al-‘amal place of employment; محل الاقامة m. al-iqāma (place of) residence, address; محل نجاري (tijārī) business house, commercial house; المحلات العمومية (‘umūmīya, tijārīya) public utilities and commercial houses; اسم المحل ism al-m. firm; محل رهونات m. ruhūnāt pawnshop; محلات السياحة m. as-siyāḥfa travel agencies; محل مرطبات m. muraṭṭibāt refreshment parlor; محل اللهو m. al-lahw and محل الملاهي m. al-malāhī (pl. محال) amusement center; محل نزاع m. nizā‘ object 199 of controversy, controversial matter; لا ارى محلا لعجب lā arā m. li-‘ajabin I don’t see any reason for amazement, there is nothing to be astonished about; محل m. naẓar s.th. deserving attention, a striking, remarkable thing


محل maḥill due date; date of delivery


محل maḥala a, maḥila a (maḥl, محول muḥūl) and maḥula u (محالة maḥāla) to be barren (land, year); -- maḥāla, maḥila a and maḥula u (محال miḥāl) to plot, scheme, intrigue (ب against s.o.) <b>IV</b> to be barren and arid; to render barren (هـ the soil); to be overdue, be withheld, fail to set in (rains) <b>V</b> to seek to attain by cunning or through intrigues (هـ s.th.), strive cunningly (هـ for); to seek a pretext; to propagandize or advertise (ل s.th.) artfully or with unfair means) │ تمحل العذر (‘udr) to use a pretext, make an excuse


محل maḥl barrenness, aridity, drought; dearth, famine; cunning, craft, deceit; (see also under حل ḥalla)